# Java Records

Let's enhance the upcoming Java programming language enhancement `record` today.
Records are described in [JEP 359(Preview)](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/359) (follow-up to [JEP draft(Second Preview)](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/8242303)) and by Brian Goetz in [Data Classes and Sealed Types for Java](https://cr.openjdk.java.net/~briangoetz/amber/datum.html).

Here, I propose new methods to be added to the `java.lang.Record` type.
Or, these new methods can also reside in a `java.util.Records` helper taking the record object as a first parameter.
Yes, an externally hosted `RecordHelper` class is probably the best target.
For the time being.

## New method `<T> T clone(Map<String, Object> overrides)`

This method creates a clone of a record object using the given named value overrides.
If an override is not mapped for a component, the component value of the record object being cloned is used as the default value.

### Example for Record#clone(Map)
```java
record R(T0 n0, T1 n1, ... Tn nn) {}

var template = new R(v0, v1, v2, ...);
var expected = new R(v0, o1, v2, ...);
var actual = template.clone(Map.of("n1", o1));

assert expected.equals(actual);
```

If named parameters are a thing in the future, a type-safe syntax could look like:

```
template.clone(n1 -> o1, ...);
```


## New method `String toTextBlock()`

For record types, a `public String toString()` method implementation is generated for us.
It returns a "string representation of all the record components, with their names".
That's nice.
All in one line.
That's not so nice.
Especially when your record contains many components.
And components are sometimes records, as well.
Their components contribute to the same line.

The `String toTextBlock()` method also produces a string representation.
But with new line separators and tab characters inserted to achieve a tree-like view of all record components.

### Example for Record#toTextBlock()

Given the record declartion `R`:
```
record R(T0 n0, T1 n1, ... Tn nn) {}
```

Then `toString()` produces:
```
"R[n0=v0, n1=v1, ... nn=vn]" // produced by toString()
```

The string representation produced by `toTextBlock()` looks like:
```
""" 
R
\tn0 = v0
\tn1 = v1
...
\tnn = vn
"""
```

Values of type record are printed as indented text blocks.
Values that are of type `java.util.Collection<? extends Record>` could also be unrolled.

## Preview Today

Let's make use these proposed methods with Java classes that adhere to the restrictions imposed by records.
Today.

Citing from https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/359

> **Restrictions on records**
>
> Records cannot extend any other class, and cannot declare instance fields other than the private final fields which correspond to components of the state description. Any other fields which are declared must be static. These restrictions ensure that the state description alone defines the representation.
> Records are implicitly final, and cannot be abstract. These restrictions emphasize that the API of a record is defined solely by its state description, and cannot be enhanced later by another class or record.
> The components of a record are implicitly final. This restriction embodies an immutable by default policy that is widely applicable for data aggregates.

```java
@RecordClass // similar to @FunctionalInterface
public static final class Item {

  private final String name;
  private final List<Item> items;
  
  public Item(String name, List<Item> items) {
    this.name = name;
    this.items = items;
  }
  
  public String name() { return name; }
  
  public List<Item> items() { return items; }
  
  // equals(), hashCode(), and toString() left out -- IDEs generate them for you 
}
```

## Records.clone()

```java
static <R extends Record> R clone(R template, Map<String, Object> overrides) {
  try {
    var types = new ArrayList<Class<?>>();
    var values = new ArrayList<>();
    for (var component : template.getClass().getRecordComponents()) {
      types.add(component.getType());
      var name = component.getName();
      var overridden = overrides.containsKey(name);
      values.add(overridden ? overrides.get(name) : component.getAccessor().invoke(template));
    }
    var canonical = template.getClass().getDeclaredConstructor(types.toArray(Class[]::new));
    @SuppressWarnings("unchecked")
    var result = (R) canonical.newInstance(values.toArray(Object[]::new));
    return result;
  } catch (ReflectiveOperationException e) {
    throw new AssertionError("Reflection failed: " + e, e);
  }
}
```
- TODO Outline `toTextBlock()` implementation
